# Commit 01

I think the first commit will be the hardest to understand. If I can digest it then later commits should become easier. Let's give it a go. 

Let's copy across the files in the first commit from the git repo to src directory in this repo, and commit it to this repo.

There are a few things I could do to start. I could start with the 'README' that Linus wrote for the first commit. Or I could start building to see if I can build the first commit. Or I could jump in and start reading the code. 

I guess we can start noting an observation and then skim the 'README'. It is not necessary to understand every bit of information in README file, but reading it is good start. It might be the boring but necessary task in order to try to correctly appraoch it. I can't be certain that this is the correct approach, but I think without first reading the basics that Linus was thinking about, we can't get anywhere meaningful.

## Early Observations 
1. There are 8 .c files that Linus wrote. He did not start one huge .c file to begin with. 
2. Looking at the Makefile, Linus builds 6 executable files from the source files. This again seem rather large number of programs for the first commit. 
3. The 6 programs are 'update-cache', 'show-diff', 'write-tree', 'read-tree', 'commit-tree' and 'cat-file'. Looks like these are component programs that will be glued together at some later stage. 
4. the build target 'init-db' has a dependency 'init-db.o' but no rule for building it. I think Linus will initialise the db (don't know what that is) mannually. That is a bit of problem because I won't know what he did because it won't be caputred in the history. 
5. The Makefile has a 'backup' target that depends on 'clean'. It requires cleaning up the repo and then runing tar on a directory named 'dir-cache' to generate a compressed archive. 

## Observations from the README file
6. In the 'README' file, Linus calls it 'git - the stupid content tracker' and later calls it 'directoy content tracker'. He does not use the term 'version control'. He says that this content tracker doesn't do much but it efficiently tracks the directory contents. 

7. He defines to object abstractions. a) the `object database` and b) the `current directory cache`. He then goes into detail about each. It's not feasible to repeat or summarise it here. Its best to go and read it in the 'README' in the `src` directory. 

## Object Database
8. The `object database` is a content-addressable collection of objects. All objects are named based on the SHA1 hash of their contents. 

9. The objects in the `object database` can refer to other objects by using their SHA1 hash. 
10. There are several types of objects in the `object database`. For each object, the content is compressed (deflated using zlib). They start off with the tag indicating their type, followed by the size information and followed by data. All of this is compressed and its SHA1 hash is calculated to store it in the `object database`. 
11. Any object in the `object database` can be validated by checking its SHA1 hash, which should match its name in the `object database`. 
12. When an object is inflated, it must inflate to a stream of bytes that forms a sequence of \<ascii tage without the space> + \<space> + \<decimal size in ascii> + \<byte\0> + \<binary object content>. 

## Object types

### Blob Object
A `blob` object is a binary blob of data. It does not refer to any other object. 
There is no signature or any other verification of data since it is stored using 
its SHA1 hash which can be used to check its integrity. It has no other attributes. 
No name association, no permissions. 

### Tree Object

Tree object is an object used to create object hierarchy. A `tree object` is a list of permission/name/blob data, sorted by name. In other words, the tree object is is uniquely determined by the set contents, and so two separate but identical trees will always share the exact same object. 

`Tree object` is just a pure data abstraction: It has no history, no signature, no verification of validity (except that the contentsa are protected by the Hash). You can trust the integrity of the contents of tree object the same way you can trust the integrity of the blob object. 

13. If a file is renamed, its blob object will not change. Similarly if a file permissions are changed, its blob object will also not change. 

14. Since tree objects are sorted lists of 'filename + contents blob ID', you can easily compare trees and list the relative changes by ignoring the common items shared by the two trees and focussing on the 
items that are different between the trees. 

### CHANGSET object
The `changeset` object is an object that is used to introduce the notion of history. 
In contrast to other objects, it doesn't just describe the physical state of the tree, 
it describes how we got there, and why.

A `changeset` is defined by the tree-object that it results in, the parent changeset (zero, one or more) that led up to that point, and a comment on what happend. 

A `changeset` is not trusted per se. Its interity can be checked by cryptographically strong signatures, but there is no reason to believe that the tree is good or merge information makes sense. 

15. changeset does not contain rename information or file mode change information. All of that is implicit in the tree involved (the result tree, and the result tree of the parent). 
 
16. Just because all the data is stored using SHA hashes, does not mean that the data is trust worthy. It just means that we can check that integrity of data to ensure that no one has messed with it after it was created. 

17. To introduce trust into the system, you need to digitally sign a special note containing the name of the top-level changeset. Your digital signature will indicate to others that you trust that changeset. Since changesets are protected from modification via the cryptographically strong hash, your signature will indicate that the whole history of that changset is trusted. 

18. git only handles content integrity. The trust must be introduced from the outside. 


## Current Directory Cache (".dircache/index")

The `current directory cache` is a simple binary file, which contains an efficient representation of a virtual directory content at some random time. It does so via an array object that associates a set of names, dates, permissions and content (blob) objects together. The cache is always kept in ordered by name, and names are unique at any point in time, but the cache has no long term meaning and can be partially updated at any time. 

The `current directory cache` need not be consistent with the contents of the current directory at all times. It has two very important attributes. 

A. It can regenerate the full state it caches (not just the directory structure: through the blob object it can regenerate the data too). 

As a special case, there is a clear and unambigous mapping from a current directory cache to a `tree object`, which can be efficiently created from just the `current directory cache` without actually looking at any other data. So a directory cache at any time uniquely specifies one and one one `tree object` but has additional data to make it easy to match up that tree object with what has happened in the directory. 

B. It has efficient methods for finding inconsistencies between that caches state and the current state. 
These are the only two things the cache does. The normal operation is to regenerate it completely given a known tree object, or update/compare it with a live tree that is being developed. If you blow the directory cache away, you haven't lost any information as long as you have the name of the tree that it describes. 


### END of README
That concludes the reading of README. It was a bit boring but necessary read. 
Now moving on to other aspects. 

### Building the first commit
I think it will be good step to try to build the first commit and see what happens. Let's switch the notes file to `build_c1.md`. 
 
